# Have Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Sentencing Declined?

## Zotero links

* [Local library](zotero://select/items/1_RMD3J9EE)
* [Cloud library](http://zotero.org/users/4968335/items/RMD3J9EE)

## Metadata

* Item Type: [[Article]]
* Authors: [[Ryan D. King]], [[Michael T. Light]]
* Date: [[2019-05]]
* Date Added: [[2022-04-16]]
* URL: [https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/701505](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/701505)
* DOI: [10.1086/701505](https://doi.org/10.1086/701505)
* Cite key: kingHaveRacialEthnic2019
* Topics: [[Criminology]]
, #zotero, #literature-notes, #reference, #criminology 
* PDF Attachments
	- [Have Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Sentencing Declined_King_Light_2019.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/H2W2RGJA)
	- [Have Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Sentencing Declined_King_Light_2019.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PWITUSKV)

## Abstract

Blacks and Hispanics convicted of felonies are more likely than whites to receive prison sentences for their crimes, and they receive slightly longer sentences if imprisoned. Yet the majority of prior research compares sentencing decisions at a single point in time and does not give explicit attention to whether and how racial and ethnic disparities have changed. Decades of sentencing data from Minnesota, the federal courts, and a sample of large urban counties are used to assess the degree of change in racial and ethnic sentencing disparities since the 1980s. There has been some decline in the magnitude of racial and ethnic disparities, with changes in drug laws aligning with some of the reduction in disparity at the federal level. This trend, along with the pattern of findings from related studies, poses a challenge to prominent theoretical explanations of sentencing disparities, including racial threat theory and the focal concerns perspective. Each of four influential theoretical explanations of racial and ethnic disparities in sentencing includes significant empirical or logical shortcomings. Advancing theoretical understanding of racial and ethnic disparity will require new data that follow cases from the point of arrest through to final disposition and include information about citizenship and victims.


## Highlights and Annotations

- [[kingHaveRacialEthnic2019 - Annotations (5262022, 30003 PM)]]

## My notes

-


* Mdnotes File Name: [[kingHaveRacialEthnic2019]]

# Annotations(2022-05-26)
“Much legal and social science scholarship attempts to explain why racial disparities exist in just about every criminal justice statistic and to determine what causes them. Three contributing factors are investigated: racial differences in offending, enactment of ostensibly race-neutral laws that have disparate racial impacts (e.g., the infamous federal crack vs. cocaine disparity; Tonry and Melewski 2008, pp. 29–30), and unequal treatment by the justice system.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 366)“In other words, how much of the disparity is due to discrimination by those who legislate, arrest, prosecute, and punish?” (King and Light, 2019, p. 366)“Further, sending a convicted defendant to prison has ramifications well beyond the prison walls, as a bout of imprisonment adversely affects employment opportunities, wages, and long-term health (Pager 2003; Western 2006; Massoglia and Pridemore 2015). On that note, the sheer size of the imprisoned population and its racial disparities have motivated many scholars to claim that the criminal justice system is now a salient driver of racial stratification in the United States (Alexander 2012).” (King and Light, 2019, p. 367)“Given gross disparities in arrest and aggregate imprisonment rates, it may seem axiomatic that blacks, and perhaps members of other racial minorities, are more likely than whites to be sentenced to prison. If the question is posed simply as Are whites and nonwhites sent to prison at different rates? the answer is unequivocally yes.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 367)“The more complicated question, and one that generates less consensus, is whether unwarranted racial disparities in sentencing exist. That is, do racial differences in punishments merely reflect racial differences in crime severity and the criminal records of defendants?” (King and Light, 2019, p. 367)“In other words, racial differences in sentencing outcomes are not explained by characteristics of the crime or the defendant’s criminal record.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 368)“Our objective here is not to conduct another meta-analysis or exhaustive summary of research on racial disparities in sentencing. Our reading of the literature leads us to the same summary statement that Baumer (2013, p. 12) offered: “The consistent finding from recent overviews on studies of race and sentencing in samples of convicted defendants is that there are often relatively small but statistically significant direct race differences in the probability of imprisonment to the disadvantage of blacks (compared to whites), and comparatively smaller and statistically nonsignificant direct race differences in prison sentence lengths between these groups.”” (King and Light, 2019, p. 368)“Rather than focus on the singular question of whether unwarranted disparities in sentencing exist in the aggregate, we give overdue attention to three larger themes. First, to what extent have sentencing disparities changed over time?” (King and Light, 2019, p. 368)“Second, it is time for a critical appraisal of theoretical explanations of race and sentencing. We identify four explanations that frequently motivate research on the topic, ranging from cognitive theories that emphasize implicit biases to macro-level theories that draw attention to county and state demographics.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 369)“Other explanations, such as the focal concerns perspective on sentencing, arguably fit the data too well, raising questions about the theory’s specificity and falsifiability.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 369)“Third, we identify and expound on data problems that preclude a more complete assessment of the reasons for sentencing disparities.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 369)“The data typically relate to convicted felony offenders who receive sentences, yet by that point in the process several earlier decisions have been made that almost certainly have consequences for sentencing outcomes. For instance, felony charges that result in misdemeanor convictions do not show up in felony sentencing files. Prosecutors’ decisions to drop cases or to charge more severe crimes will affect which cases appear in the file and, if convicted, the ultimate sentence. Yet the exercise of prosecutorial discretion is not captured in most sentencing data. The few studies that follow cases from the point of arrest show that much of the racial disparity in sentencing reflects decisions made by prosecutors, particularly the decision whether to charge defendants under statutes that require mandatory minimum sentences (Rehavi and Starr 2014).” (King and Light, 2019, p. 369)“In Section II, we turn to the question of whether racial and ethnic disparities in sentencing have changed during the past three decades. Our analysis of decades of data from the federal courts, Minnesota, and the State Court Processing Statistics Survey suggests some movement toward equality.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 370)“First, blacks tend to receive harsher sentences than whites, even after taking crime severity and criminal history into account. The magnitude of this difference is usually small but nonetheless indicates a pattern of disparate outcomes. To illustrate this point, we present in table 1 two typical analyses of sentencing decisions for samples of blacks and whites for two jurisdictions, Minnesota and the federal system, for the years 201113. The outcome variable in each analysis is a dichotomous indicator of whether the convicted defendant received a prison sentence or an alternative, such as probation or a shorter jail sentence. The bivariate associations (models 1 and 3) are statistically and substantively significant, with the odds of receiving a prison sentence 72 percent higher for blacks relative to whites in Minnesota and 75 percent higher for blacks in the federal courts.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 371)(King and Light, 2019, p. 371) Simple logistic regression model“A second recurrent finding is that disparities between blacks and whites are more pronounced for the in-out decision than for decisions about sentence length (Mitchell 2005). Conditional on going to prison, whites and blacks tend to receive similar lengths of confinement for comparable crimes (Baumer 2013, p. 12).” (King and Light, 2019, p. 373)“Third, there is considerable heterogeneity in the relationship between race and sentencing. For example, research consistently finds that the association between race and sentencing outcomes is conditional on other offender attributes, such as gender and age.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 373)“Hispanic defendants were significantly more likely than white defendants to be sent to prison, while Hispanic-white differences in sentence length were generally small and not statistically significant (Mitchell and MacKenzie 2004). Differences were also observed across offense types, with Hispanic ethnicity exerting the strongest influence in cases involving drugs. A summary review of 40 studies largely confirms this general set of findings (Spohn 2000).” (King and Light, 2019, p. 374)(King and Light, 2019, p. 377) Really good literature review in Section 1 of this article.“The research just discussed is based on point-in-time estimates of racial and ethnic disparities. But have they changed over time? Are we trending toward more equity in this phase of the criminal justice process? Or have efforts to reduce bias, such as sentencing guidelines, failed to accomplish their objective? Worse still, might the sentencing reform movement have backfired and resulted in greater racial disparities?” (King and Light, 2019, p. 377)“Racial disparity is a staple of sentencing research because it is a social problem that, as a society, we presumably want to eradicate. This is certainly the aim of widely read indictments of the justice system (Alexander 2012), documentaries along the same lines (13th), and organizations dedicated to sentencing reform (The Sentencing Project; e.g., Ghandnoosh 2015).2” (King and Light, 2019, p. 378)“More to the point, are we headed in the right direction? We are surprised at how little has been written on this question. It is hard to imagine a body of research on crime that did not give attention to crime trends or on imprisonment that did not focus on change over time.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 378)“The Pew Research Center reports that, since the 1960s, the white-black gaps have narrowed for measures of high school completion, college completion, poverty, and to a lesser extent family income (Parker, Horowitz, and Mahl 2016). Aggregate disparities on these outcomes certainly persist, but they are generally trending toward greater equality.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 378)“The current racial disparity in imprisonment is large—excessively large in our opinion—especially when compared to black-white ratios and Hispanic-white ratios for measures of poverty or employment, but the trend line since 1980 appears to bend toward less disparity than in decades past.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 379)“We try to gain some clarity on this issue by analyzing three data sets: federal sentencing data from 1992 to 2016, Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission data between 1981 and 2013, and State Court Processing Statistics Survey data collected between 1990 and 2009. Each data source has been used in prior research; additional details and notes about them can be found in the Appendix.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 380)“Another way to look at sentencing trends is to focus on the adjusted disparity rather than the sentence gap. That is, do the declines in racial and ethnic disparity depicted in figures 1–5 persist after we account for the presumptive sentence? To “net out” the influence of the presumptive sentence, and thereby isolate the discretionary portion of the sentence, we examine the adjusted black-white sentence disparity.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 386)“This gives us the average deviation from the guideline recommendations for blacks as a proportion of their prescribed sentence. We then do the same for whites and then subtract the white deviation from the black deviation. Stated more formally, Adjusted black  white sentence disparity p (Sbt=Pbt) 2 (Swt=Pwt),” (King and Light, 2019, p. 387)“where S indicates the average pronounced sentence and P is the average presumptive sentence in year t for blacks (b) and whites (w)” (King and Light, 2019, p. 387)“More specifically, positive values indicate that black offenders receive less of a proportional discount from their presumptive sentence than whites. For example, 70 percent of white offenders received a prison sentence in 1992, but 86 percent of whites should have received imprisonment if judges simply followed the presumptive sentence specified in the guidelines. Whites thus received only 81 percent of the recommended prison sentences on average (70/86 p 0.81). That same year, 80 percent of sentenced blacks were imprisoned while the guidelines called for 89 percent to be imprisoned, and thus pronounced imprisonment sentences were 90 percent of the presumptive prisons sentences (0.80/0.89 p 0.9). Therefore, the adjusted black-white sentence disparity for that year is 9 percent (0.90 2 0.81 p 0.09)” (King and Light, 2019, p. 387)“The adjusted sentence length disparities are depicted by the black line in figure 6. For this analysis, we use the same equation as the adjusted imprisonment disparities, but the pronounced and adjusted sentences are calculated slightly differently. Here, the pronounced sentence is the average sentence length in months for a given group (e.g., white, black) in a given year. The presumptive sentence is the average minimum number of months of prison recommended by the guidelines (see the Appendix for further details) for a given group in a given year.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 388)(King and Light, 2019, p. 391) There's no regression or real statistical methods here. We're just looking at some line graphs made in Excel.“We present a similar set of figures using data from the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission (MSGC), which maintains records for all felony sentences dating back to 1981 (our time series begins in 1982 because of missing data on sentence length in 1981).” (King and Light, 2019, p. 391)“For parsimony, we begin with the analysis of adjusted racial and ethnic disparities. Because the SCPS includes both guideline and nonguideline jurisdictions, we cannot incorporate the presumptive sentence in the same way as our previous analyses. We thus use regression analysis to model the incarceration and sentence length decisions and examine the” (King and Light, 2019, p. 397)“trends in sentencing disparities. To reduce skewness, we log the sentence length variable in the regression models.10 Following previous research, we account for several variables shown to affect sentencing decisions.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 398)“We use logistic regression to model the incarceration decision and Tobit regression to model the length of incarceration. Tobit estimation accounts for selection into the incarcerated population by assuming that the outcome measure would be normally distributed if it were fully observed. It thus accounts for both the probability that the outcome exceeds zero (i.e., that the offender received a prison sentence) and the mean value of sentence length, adjusted by covariates.” (King and Light, 2019, p. 398)(King and Light, 2019, p. 399) They're again using the nested model analysis. They also are focusing on statistical significance when they probably shouldn't be (Berk 2010)(King and Light, 2019, p. 400) The two regression models in this paper are logistic regression for the in/out incarceration decision and tobit regression for the sentence length.



