# Intersectionality of Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Age on Criminal Punishment

## Zotero links

* [Local library](zotero://select/items/1_I7PRJ9R5)
* [Cloud library](http://zotero.org/users/4968335/items/I7PRJ9R5)

## Metadata

* Item Type: [[Article]]
* Authors: [[Darrell Steffensmeier]], [[Noah Painter-Davis]], [[Jeffery Ulmer]]
* Date: [[2017-08-01]]
* Date Added: [[2022-04-16]]
* URL: [https://doi.org/10.1177/0731121416679371](https://doi.org/10.1177/0731121416679371)
* DOI: [10.1177/0731121416679371](https://doi.org/10.1177/0731121416679371)
* Cite key: steffensmeierIntersectionalityRaceEthnicity2017
* Topics: [[Criminology]]
* Tags: #age, #criminal-punishment, #ethnicity, #gender, #inequality, #intersectionality, #race, #theory, #zotero, #literature-notes, #reference, #criminology 
* PDF Attachments
	- [Intersectionality of Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Age on Criminal Punishment_Steffensmeier et al_2017.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/S78RSB9F)
	- [Intersectionality of Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Age on Criminal Punishment_Steffensmeier et al_2017.pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/NT3KLBY3)

## Abstract

Race, ethnicity, gender, and age are core foci within sociology and law/criminology. Also prominent is how these statuses intersect to affect behavioral outcomes, but statistical studies of intersectionality are rare. In the area of criminal sentencing, an abundance of studies examine main and joint effects of race and gender but few investigate in detail how these effects are conditioned by defendant’s age. Using recent Pennsylvania sentencing data and a novel method for analyzing statistical interactions, we examine the main and combined effects of these statuses on sentencing. We find strong evidence for intersectionality: Harsher sentences concentrate among young black males and Hispanic males of all ages, while the youngest females (regardless of race/ethnicity) and some older defendants receive leniency. The focal concerns model of sentencing that frames our study has strong affinity with intersectionality perspectives and can serve as a template for research examining the ways social statuses shape inequality.


## Highlights and Annotations

- [[steffensmeierIntersectionalityRaceEthnicity2017 - Annotations (5172022, 123530 PM)]]

## My notes

- The statistical analysis in this paper is really strange. They talk about not focusing on significance testing and then talk a lot about statistical significance. They also create three nested models and analyze all three separately when they should have just considered the largest model (as long as it is significantly different from the others which it seemed to be).


* Mdnotes File Name: [[steffensmeierIntersectionalityRaceEthnicity2017]]

# Annotations(2022-05-17)
“In the area of criminal sentencing, several studies have examined how race and gender interact to influence sentencing, but only a handful of studies have assessed how race/ethnicity and gender effects might be conditioned by the defendant’s age (Doerner and Demuth 2010; Steffensmeier, Ulmer, and Kramer 1998; Warren, Chiricos, and Bales 2012).” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 810)“We address these shortcomings and the scarcity of intersectionality research more generally by using sentencing data from Pennsylvania to examine the intersection of the effects of race/ ethnicity (black, white, Hispanic), gender, and age on sentencing, focusing on how each of these statuses might contextualize one another.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 811)“The primary research question is whether criminal punishment is differentially mobilized on the basis of these important social statuses, singly and in combination. How does age shape the sentencing of black and Hispanic males as compared with white males? Do racial/ ethnic disparities in sentencing for males and females vary depending on the age of defendants? Do these statuses interact to deepen punishment for some race-gender-age subgroups while softening it for others? A conceptual model oriented around the focal concerns of sentencing, together with the notion of intersectionality regarding race/ethnicity, gender, and age, theoretically frames our study.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 811)“Third, we apply a novel, more effective, and parsimonious analytic method for studying intersectionality compared with prior sentencing research.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 811)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 811) At this point, it's not at all clear what that novel method is.“Nonetheless, net of legal factors, there is considerable evidence that social status characteristics, such as the defendant’s race, ethnicity, gender, and age also influence sentencing.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 812)“Compared with race effects, gender effects are more consistently found in statistical sentencing studies” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 812)“Darrell Steffensmeier, John Kramer, and Jeffrey Ulmer (1995) were the first to discover a curvilinear relationship between age and sentencing,” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 812)“Last, research on the interactive effects of race, gender, and age on sentencing outcomes is especially scarce.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 812)“Due to data constraints (e.g., small sample sizes), studies of intersectionality have omitted Hispanics altogether (Steffensmeier et al. 1998), used overly broad age groupings to study Hispanics (Kramer and Ulmer 2009; Warren et al. 2012), confounded white and Hispanic effects by coding practices that classify some Hispanic defendants as white (Kramer and Ulmer 2009), or focused only on age by race effects for males (LaFrentz and Spohn 2006). Studying age effects for females is difficult because of small N’s for females in some race/ethnicity-age groups.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 813)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 813) This is one of the missing data issues that Clare was talking about. Misclassifying Hispanic defendants, overly broad categories constructed from continuous variables, etc.“For our purposes here, the main premise is that the meaning, relative emphasis and priority, and situational interpretation of the focal concerns are shaped not only by legally relevant factors but also by the defendants’ gender, age, racial/ethnic status, singly, and in combination—that is, by their intersectionality.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 815)“Crucially, the focal concerns are shaped by the intersection of these statuses such that the influence of a particular status on sentencing outcomes, such as race, is likely to be conditioned by other statuses (age, gender). The stereotypes associated with one status category may heighten or soften the labels associated with another status category in ways that influence the application of the focal concerns.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 816)“To assess our hypotheses, we analyzed sentencing outcomes in Pennsylvania for 2003–2010 using Pennsylvania Commission on Sentencing (PCS) data. Covering felony and misdemeanor convictions, these data offer some of the richest information on state sentencing patterns. Although Pennsylvania has sentencing guidelines, they allow more discretion than some systems (e.g., Federal, Minnesota), which enhances the risk of sentencing disparity. As Pennsylvania is a very diverse state in terms of racial composition and political and social contexts, study findings should have broad generalizability to other localities.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 818)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 818) No mention of missing data.“Many argue that sentencing involves a two stage decision process: first, a decision whether to incarcerate the offender, and second, if incarcerated, a decision regarding length of sentence. We therefore investigate the role of race, ethnicity, age, and gender both singly and in combination with logit models for the in-out decision and ordinary least squares (OLS) models of minimum incarceration length.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 818)“Our length models include only incarceration cases. Sentence length is measured as the minimum length of incarceration associated with the most serious offense within a judicial proceeding and ranges from a few days to 300 months. We use the natural logarithm of the incarceration sentence to adjust for skewness in sentence length.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 818)“Extra-legal variables. Gender is measured using a single dummy variable. Race and ethnicity are measured using three dummy variables: White (reference), Black, and Hispanic. We include as Hispanic those defendants who are identified as “Hispanic” in the PCS database as well as those whose last names qualify as Spanish surnames that the U.S. Census Bureau classifies as “Heavily Hispanic.” For age, our analysis includes defendants between the ages of 18 and 64. Throughout the analysis, we focus on four distinct age groupings: 18 to 20, 21 to 34 (reference), 35 to 49, and” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 818)“50 to 64.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819)“Legal and case processing variables. Our primary control variable is the presumptive sentence, which is a measure of what the guidelines propose as the appropriate sentence based on offense severity and the offender’s criminal history.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819)“Our lack of preconviction data means we may be understating overall, process-wide disparity, if such disparity is evident in prosecutors’ charging decisions and plea agreement behavior.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819)“Because our data set is not a sample, but contains data on all convicted defendants in Pennsylvania for the 2003 to 2010 period, statistical tests of significance do not apply in the conventional sense of assessing error in making inference to the universe from which the sample was drawn (Berk 2010). Also, because the number of cases included in the analysis is very large, many small sentencing differences between groups can emerge as statistically significant. As such, we place more emphasis on the direction and magnitude of the coefficients than on statistical significance levels and gauge the relative importance of the effects of the independent variables according to odds of incarceration and differences in months for sentence length (Steffensmeier and Demuth 2000; also see Bushway, Sweeten, and Wilson 2006).” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819) This seems like both a statistically advisable approach albeit with some cautions. Significance testing is probably not a good idea here because we have such a large data set and so the standard errors will be small. Having the whole population of convicted defendants in the time period doesn't mean you observed the whole population though. All of the counterfactuals for each case weren't observed. Need to see what (Berk, 2010) has to say.There is also some signs that there will be some conflating of correlation and causation here.“We begin our analysis by examining the main effects of status characteristics on sentencing outcomes. We then use two- and three-way product terms to statistically assess whether race/ethnicity, gender, and age interact to influence sentencing. After conducting two- and three-way interactions, we use a suite of post-estimation commands from Stata to gain better insights into the interactions between status characteristics (Long and Freese 2014).” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819) So it sounds like they did one set of two-stage models with just the main effects and another set with the interaction effects.“We use the testparm command to assess whether the overall interaction between our categorical variables is statistically significant (Tran et al. 2015). The testparm command is a Wald test that allows us to examine the null hypothesis that our interaction terms are simultaneously equal to 0 (Long and Freese 2014).” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 819)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 820) Awful lot of focus on significance testing after talking about how that isn't a focus.“Table 1 shows additive models of the in-out and length-of-term decisions, with the main effects for the control variables as well as race, ethnicity, gender, and age. As is found generally, the main legal variables—presumptive sentence and mandatory eligibility—are associated most strongly with sentence outcomes and thus are important statistical controls; also, defendants with multiple versus a single conviction charge receive modestly more severe sentences. Net of controls, race, ethnicity, gender, and age have substantial main effects on sentence outcomes. The results are consistent with H1 that males and racial/ethnic minorities will receive harsher sentences. The gender effects are the largest, with female defendants being much less likely to be incarcerated and more likely to receive shorter sentences than males. Regarding raceethnicity, black and Hispanic defendants are both more likely to be incarcerated than whites and to receive longer sentences.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 820)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 820) This main effects model should only be here as a comparison to the third order model not to be analyzed on its own!“Table 2 presents the results of the logistic regression analysis of the in-out decision and the OLS models of sentence length. The models include two-way product terms of the interaction between race/ethnicity and gender.” (Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 821)(Steffensmeier et al., 2017, p. 821) So there are actually three models we're talking about. Not sure what this one is doing here.



